\section{Ecosystems and evolutionary dynamics}

Another major area for GAs in artificial life research is in modeling
ecosystem behavior and the evolutionary dynamics of populations.
(Ackley and Littman's work described above could fit into this category
as well.)  Here we describe two such models: Holland's Echo system, meant to
allow a large range of ecological interactions to be modeled, and 
Bedau and Packard's ``Strategic Bugs'' system, for which a measure of
``evolutionary activity'' is defined and studied.  

\subsection{Echo}

Echo is a model of ecological systems formulated by Holland
\cite{Holland92a,Holland93a}. 
Echo models ecologies in the same sense that the GA models population
genetics \cite{Holland93a}.  It abstracts away virtually all of the physical
details of real ecological systems and concentrates on a small set of
primitive agent-agent and agent-environment interactions.  The extent
to which Echo captures the essence of real ecological systems is still
largely undetermined, yet it is significant because of the generality
of the model and its ambitious scope.  The goal of Echo is to study how
simple interactions among simple agents lead to emergent high-level
phenomena such as the flow of resources in a system or cooperation and
competition in networks of agents (e.g., communities, trading
networks, or arms races).  Echo extends the GA in several important
ways: resources are modeled explicitly in the system, individuals
(called agents) have geographic location which affects
their fitness, interactions between agents is built into the system,
and fitness is endogenous.

Like Ackley and Littman's ERL model, Echo consists of a population of
agents distributed on a lattice.  Many agents can cohabit the same
site, and there is a measure of locality within each site.  Also
distributed on the lattice are different types of renewable resources;
each type of resource is encoded by a letter (e.g., ``a,'' ``b,''
``c,'' ``d'').  Different types of agents use different types of
resources and can store these resources (the letters) internally.

Agents interact by mating, trading, or fighting.  Trading and fighting
result in the exchange of internal resources between agents, and
mating results in an offspring whose genome is a combination of those
of the parents. Each agent has a particular set of rules
which determine its interactions with other agents (e.g., which
letters it is willing to trade, the conditions under which it will
fight, how much of its internal resources it will devote to the
interaction, etc.).  ``External appearance'' can also be coded in
these rules as a string ``tag'' visible to other agents.  This
allows the possibility of the evolution of social rules and
potentially of ``mimicry,'' a phenomenon frequently observed in
natural ecosystems.  The interaction rules rely only on string
matching, and are easily represented as a linear genome.

Each agent's genotype encodes the rules by which it interacts and the
types of resources it requires.  As in many other artificial-life
models (e.g., ERL and the Strategic Bugs model described below), Echo
has no explicit fitness function guiding selection and reproduction.
Instead, an agent reproduces (sometimes by mating with another agent)
when it accumulates sufficient resources to make an exact copy of its
genome.  For example, if an agent's genome consists of 25 a's, 13 b's,
and 50 c's, then it would have to accumulate in its internal storage
at least 25 a's, 13 b's, and 50 c's before cloning itself.  As usual,
cloning is subject to a low rate of mutation.

In preliminary simulations, the Echo system has demonstrated
surprisingly complex behavior (including something resembling a
biological ``arms race'' in which two competing species develop
progressively more complex offensive and defensive combat strategies),
ecological dependencies among different species (e.g., a symbiotic
``ant-caterpillar-fly'' triangle), and sensitivity (in terms of the
number of different phenotypes) to differing levels of renewable
resources \cite{Holland92a}.  

Some possible directions for future work on Echo include: (1) studying
the evolution of external tags as mechanisms for social communication;
(2) extending the model to allow the evolution of
``metazoans''---connected communities of agents that have internal
boundaries and reproduce as a unit; this capacity will allow for the
study of individual agent specialization and the evolution of
multi-cellularity; (3) studying the evolutionary dynamics of schemata
in the population; and (4) using the results from (3) to formulate a
generalization of the schema theorem based on endogenous fitness
\cite{Holland93a}.
The last is a particularly important goal, since there has been
very little mathematical analysis of artificial-life simulations in which
fitness is endogenous. 
