
Hi John (and Steph). I am now back in the U.S. after almost a month of
idleness in Australia. Before I left I told Steph that I would write
up a summary of our meetings with Jim Brown. That, together with
various bits and pieces about what I have been doing/thinking/planning
etc are below.

We have had three meetings with Jim so far. I expect there will be
another in the next month or so, though nothing definite is planned
yet. I am going out for a drink with the grad student of his that
seems the most switched on and likely to get involved. A couple of
Steph's students will probably come to that, so there is interaction
at the lower levels too.

In the first Jim meeting, I did a presentation on Echo and then gave
them a demo which was extremely well-received. Steph and I saw you
after that meeting and told you some of the details etc, so I wont
describe it here.

In the second meeting, we had a good discussion about what sorts of
things they thought could be addressed with Echo and what sort of
things would need to be done to it to make such experiments possible.

Jim started the discussion by saying that he thought there were 2
directions we could move in. 

The first was to try and model some specific ecological phenomena by
making some specific changes to Echo. For example, Jim talked of
situations where there is some limited supply of some resource (which
need not correspond to an Echo resource). For instance, plants on hard
surfaces where there is a shortage of space. Or some system with a
primary resource like sunlight or soil nutrient. These examples, now
that I come to type them in, don't sound like they'd need too much
modification to Echo, but I think that the kind of details Jim
envisioned being able to model did.

In the second, Echo could be run, virtually as is, to see how it
behaved as we varied some aspect of the runs and to see if that
behavior was similar to that found in the real world. An example of
this that you're familiar with is the tropical rainforest experiment.
Briefly, what happens to the number of variants alive and extinct over
time as you increase the richness of the world?

Steph and I were both pleased that they thought that Echo already
captured enough of the real world for us to embark on this sort of
thing without needing to enhance it.

In both directions we would look at Echo as a model of some aspect of
the real world. To me the second is more appealing as it seems that
the emphasis in the first is more on modeling while the second
emphasizes both Echo as it stands and its (suspected) inherent ability
to do such modeling. In addition, the second approach doesn't require
specializing Echo - or at least it doesn't require the addition of
things that will not be of general use to future Echo users. At this
early stage I think it would be a mistake to start adding that sort of
functionality. It's not really clear what Echo "is", but that seems to
be a move in the wrong direction.

Steph agrees that the second approach is the right thing to do too,
though the above may not correspond to her reasoning. But it's
something like that I am sure.

Others who were present then mentioned ideas that they had had about
things we could do. I'll mention these briefly.

One question that was raised was: If you have more than one site (say
two), migration, and you start the sites with the same populations (I
just made that last bit up), could you evolve to the point where you
had an agent surviving at one site that could not survive at the
other? 

My feeling is that this sort of thing could and would happen in Echo
as it stands. I don't think it's terribly interesting (in the sense of
not knowing if it would happen), though I would be happy if someone
demonstrated it. It would require that the conditions leading to
migration were not too easily satisfied. Looking at the question more
closely, it is not clear what exactly you are looking for. It's more
of a probabilistic thing. Could an agent evolve that would probably
survive for a long time at one site and probably be driven to
extinction (or thereabouts) at the other in a short time?  There are
lots of details that would need to be addressed. In any case, this is
something that Echo is pretty much ready to look at, and falls into
the second category above.

The same person (Alan) suggested something that would be interesting
to him and his research. This falls into the first category. He'd like
to see some measure of "life history" in Echo's agents. He does things
with trees and is interested in there being a distinction between
juveniles and adults. He's interested in the evolution of the life
history pattern - whatever that is. He talked about the developmental
pattern that exists on the genome, and so on. I wont say more, I don't
think I could do his ideas any justice.

Tim (Keitt), the grad student I mentioned before, wondered whether an
Echo ecosystem could reach a non-invadible (-able? -sable? -sible?)
point. I don't think he meant truly non-invadible. At least in Echo
for a given world in a given state, I don't think it would be hard to
design a new agent that could invade successfully. More realistic
would be to look at some measure of invadibility and see if that, in
general, decreased over time. Stu Kauffmann and I once had a
discussion in which he told me of ecosystems (on sand dunes I think)
that became increasingly hard to invade.

Tim also mentioned looking at patterns of resource flow and
distribution in Echo runs.  This gave me the idea of radioactive
resources - have some "isotope" of a resource (say A) and call it A'.
It can do all the things A can, but you can watch where it is in the
world - see what sites it is at, what sorts of agents it is in.
Perhaps mark all the A's in the initial population that are in flies,
or something like that. I think this direction is fairly interesting,
but again it requires some fairly specialized changes to the basic
Echo. I can think of a couple of ways it might be solved without too
much change, but I wont go into them here. I didn't mention this
"radioactive resource" idea in the meeting. Toxic resources too have
been mentioned at some point.

Jim then brought up the tropical rainforest question again. There was
some discussion about what a species was in Echo. As far as I was
concerned, this was not really a problem. Jim seems to tend toward the
"every different genome is a different species" point of view - I'm
not sure why. Mine is the biological version of speciation - a subset
of the population that can (and does) interbreed successfully. This
requires that sex exist of course. As far as I remember, we talked
about this the last time you were at SFI, and this was the way you saw
it too.

Regardless of the way you define a species, you can still look at the
number of genomes that have ever existed and the number that currently
exist and how the ratios and so on differ as the richness of the world
changes. More on this later, as this topic was addressed in the third
meeting.

Jim also mentioned doing some experiments in which we did some control
runs and then looked how Echo changed when one simple (at least
conceptually) thing was altered, say the enabling of migration, a
change in tag matching specificity, or even what happens when half the
population is destroyed at some point.

Another suggestion he made was to alter the supply of resources at a
site during a run. The simplest way I could think of to do this
(without just using the debugger :-)) was to have each site have a
vector of [0.0, 1.0] reals that was used to multiply the site's
production function at the end of each generation. Thus if you wanted
the supply of resource A to die out at a site, its production function
multiplier vector could look like (0.9, 1.0, 1.0, ...). That would be
a fairly simple modification, and, importantly, one that had a special
case that left Echo undisturbed.


I tried to summarize what I had heard and told them that as far as I
was concerned I'd rather look at something that didn't require too
many (or any if possible) modifications to what I see as being the
essence of Echo. Of the above questions, I listed the ones that I saw
as being in this class:

  * Existence of agents at sites that could exist elsewhere.
  * A site reaching a less invadable state.
  * The "tropical rainforest" question.
  * Looking at the effect of a single simple change.
  * Changing the symbol supply in some simple way.

The fourth of these is very general, and perhaps should not have been
listed.

Then I asked told them that it would probably be useful to try and
think of the sorts of things they'd like to be able to look at after
or during an Echo run. If we could identify some things common to all
of the above, then I could work on them and the work would definitely
be useful.

Things that they thought should be done included:

  * Keeping track of the number of variants (genomes) and where
    they came from.

  * Keeping track of the number of copies per genome.

  * Keeping some measure of the age of the agents.

(All of the above are currently done to some extent - it's just a
matter of how you want the information etc and presentation).

  * Having some adjustable measure of relevance. By this we meant
    that a genome (or species or whatever) should not be
    relevant until it crossed some threshold - say age or numbers.
    So in graphing the currently living population, for example,
    genomes that had fewer than, say, 5 agents would not be shown.

  * Jim was interested in keeping track of rare genotypes. (This 
    is really just a special case of the above which keeps track of
    common ones).
  
  * Graphs showing the various webs (trading, mating and combat)
    that existed. For example, you could have a scatter diagram
    that plotted a dot for each agent with the scales representing
    the number of existing agents that would attack this agent and
    the number it would attack.

  * I suggested doing cluster analysis on the genomes. This is 
    interesting for the speciation question that we talked about.
    
  * Jim suggested doing cluster analysis on the behavior of the
    agents. Then you would expect to see, at least initially, clusters
    that corresponded to the genome clusters. Later, in the third
    meeting, we observed a fly that was genetically closer to the ants
    than to other flies. How did this fly behave? Would it at some
    point begin to cluster behaviorally with ants too? Would the 
    separations happen at the same time? I think this sort of
    question is very interesting - both in general and from a
    speciation point of view.


This was about the end of the second meeting. I told them I'd get
working on some of the above and we decided to try and meet again
before the end of the year.

The third was also attended by Mike Simmons. I am not sure if he drove
down especially to hear it, but it wouldn't surprise me. He seems very
interested in all things Echo, which is great. I think he asked Steph
at some point to be kept up to date about what meetings we were having
etc. He and Bruce (Abell) and Ed aren't shy about bringing visitors to
SFI to my office for a talk and a demo.

The clustering on behavioral characteristics was suggested at this
meeting. Also, I outlined my thinking about the speciation question -
which has gotten more and more specific (more on that below if I have
time, Ana wants me to go to sleep I think). Jim seemed to think it was
a good question and that it was worth looking at and PhDable. We told
them that it was now possible to look at the number of genomes alive
versus the number that had ever existed and immediately everyone
wanted to just go and play. Various people made predictions about what
would happen if you doubled the resource inputs. Most of them were
partly wrong and partly right. Steph wrote down all of the exact
results, which I will send you later. In summary, the relationship
between the number of living species and the amount of resource input
did not seem linear. People had different opinions about why this was
so. Tim predicted it and I intend to extract more of his intuition
from him soon.

The interest level was again very high. Echo had had a very
significant facelift and looked great (even Steph thought so!). Apart
from the tracking of genomes alive versus genomes ever, there was also
stack editing and schema tracing (which Jim hadn't seen) and cluster
analysis on genomes, which proved interesting - especially when the
ant crossed the floor (genetically speaking) and clustered with the
flies. We were able to look at the mutation which had caused it and so
on. I would like to be able to look at the behavioral clustering to
see how it goes before and after the genetic departure. This is not
too hard to add. My Echo becomes bigger and slower still... Anyway we
again had about ten people engrossed in the progress of runs,
explaining them (or trying to), making predictions, asking what-if
questions and so on. Jim, again, didn't stop smiling all day.


Steph and I had one more meeting before I went away. There we both
agreed that I should work on the sorts of things that would serve both
the sorts of questions that were being asked by Jim and his group and
also the PhD. These include various things to examine populations. I
think that clustering is going to be very important to the speciation
effort.

As far as the speciation question goes, it is clearer to me now, and I
think I have quite a few details of exactly what to look for and
exactly how to look for it ironed out. Probably many of these were
already clear to you when we last talked in Steph's office. I didn't
really see a specific question until reading Mayr. In Towards A New
Philosophy of Biology (p 359) he talks of the three main controversies
that speciation still faces to some extent. (This all ties in with
your last mail to me about your differences with him, but I wont go
into that in this mail).

The second question was about how isolating methods evolve. He says a
bit later that until recently he didn't really know how it could
happen and then mentions "sexual selection" (p 362). I think this is
probably not a good term to use - it got me into some trouble with Jim,
I don't know exactly what the biologists use it for nowadays, but it
has something to do with competition amongst sperm for the egg.
Anyway, it was suddenly clear what to do with Echo. See if mating tags
could drive speciation. This, of course, was just what you'd told me
to do :-) Could this happen without the need for geographical
separation? Or would some geographical separation be needed, and for
how long? 

[As an aside, I have a viewpoint on allopatric speciation that I have
not encountered elsewhere (yet). It seems improbable that geological
events such as uplifting of mountain ranges, lava flows etc etc would
account for geographic separation too often. Much more likely, it
seems to me, is that the geography was fairly stable and that the
population was not, it was in migration. As a large population slowly
migrates or spreads over a long range, it will encounter geographic
obstacles and will, in many circumstances, divide. Whether it reforms
or not and after how long etc will be important when considering
speciation. The separation may only have to be long enough for mating
preferences to change slightly for prezygotic isolating mechanisms to
arise.]

Mayr says that this would not affect postzygotic isolation, but I
don't see why not. Once the prezygotic (based on selective mating) are
in place, genetic drift could eventually produce postzygotic ones too.

In summary, I think I see a question that can be addressed. Can
speciation be driven by isolation that comes about through selective
mating? If not, does a little bit of a geographical nudge help?

To study this in Echo I will probably do some or all of the following:

  * Turn off self-reproduction.
  * Have one site.
  * Have all mating tags empty (one initial species).
  * Design the initial agent so that it doesn't self-combat or self-trade.
  
Most of these you already suggested. In my notes I have also suggested
turning off combat, but I am now not sure that that's a good idea. I
think not. Also I had written "Introduce death due to aging" for some
reason. I later realized that one could think of the random "death
without cause" that you already have as being exactly that. Sooner or
later, probably later, you'll die from it. I don't know if you
intended it that way, but it seems like a nice way to interpret an
aspect of Echo, if you know what I mean.


That's about all I intended to say. My current plan is to finish a
paper for ICGA (on evolving Turing Machines, not Echo) in the rest of
this month. That will be fairly intensive. Steph suggested that I
should start writing papers about aspects of Echo, but I wasn't sure
that I was comfortable doing that. How do you feel about that? Of
course, any paper you wanted to be involved in you'd be welcome "on".
I think there are various places that would accept papers on it, but I
am not too sure how to go about it - how much could be assumed about what
people knew and so on? Also I don't feel that there are any results
there yet that are worth making a paper out of. This will probably
change soon enough.

I will also do some runs to keep the people at UNM interested. We have
some simple "rainforest" experiments that should prove interesting -
and maybe paper-able. This will be before the next meeting with them,
whenever that is.

Then I plan to get my thesis proposal done and experiments started on
speciation. Hopefully this will begin in mid February.

If you are still interested in being co-chair, then I'd like that very
much. I will work on speciation, I will get my degree, I wont talk in
class, I will do my homework. Doug (Hofstadter) who is on the
committee is going on sabbatical (to Italy) in September, so he wont
be around for the defense (but he will for the proposal stage). So
I'll need to get someone else from IU - maybe you have a suggestion,
preferably someone whose career depends on you... I have Greg Rawlins,
Bob Port and Mike Gasser already.

That's enough for now. There will be more to come very soon. I have to
get the ICGA thing out of the way, but soon after that things will
start to happen. 

Terry.
